Hello there.
This is the Romans.
And welcome back.
We know that a variable is like a container that holds a single value, like a primitive or an object
reference.
But sometimes we would have a collection of similar values and we would want a variable to hold such
a collection.
Such a variable that holds a collection of similar values is like a collection of containers and would
represent some data structure.
For instance, if we have to keep track of all the course titles that a student has registered for,
then instead of having a separate variable to hold each of those course titles like Course, Title one,
Course, Title two, and so on, we can store all those course titles in a single data structure which
is represented by some variable.
A data structure is an organized collection of similar data, and the software gets all of its power
through the different data structures that it uses.
And if we consider sites like Amazon where the display a list of products or a list of reviews of a
particular product, all of those items which are similar to each other, are stored in a data structure,
and they process the data structure and display those items.
So data structures are very fundamental to any programming language.
Later in the Collections Framework section, we will study several data structures that come with the
Java Library.
But for now, let's look at one very basic and fundamental data structure, which is also built into
every programming language.
And it is an array.
In fact, it is so basic that even some of the data structures that we study later are built on top
of arrays.
So let's go ahead and learn what an array is.
Another is basically a container object that holds a fixed number of values of a single type.
Some of the terms in this definition are emphasized in bold, and let's understand what they mean.
The term object in this definition implies a Java object that is in Java.
An array is basically an object and hence will be stored on the heap like any other object.
So in Java an object can be an array, or it can also be an instance of a class.
Since an area is an object, the variable referencing it is an object reference.
Next my fixed number.
We mean that the number of items an array can store is specified at the creation time and that number
cannot be changed thereafter.
So the array size is fixed.
And finally, by single type we mean that the items in the array should be of a single data type, like
an eight or double or car or even some class.
That is, it can also store object references, but only condition is that they all have to be of the
same data type.
And here is an illustration of an array which contains four integer values.
Let's assume the array represents exam scores of a student in a particular course.
Let's say the first 190 represents score in midterm.
1/2 is the score in midterm two.
Third, the final exam score.
And fourth is the project score.
Now in terms of terminology, each item in the array is referred to as an element of the array, and
an element is accessed by its index number, where index number is the numerical position of the element
in the array and index number starts with zero.
So the first element is that index zero, second index one third at index two, and for that index three.
Now, if the variable holding this array is named as scores as these are exam scores, then to access
the third element of the array, we would say scores of two as two is the index number of the third
element, which represents the final exam score.
So the index number will be specified in the square brackets.
Now let's head over to our editor and see how we can create such an array.
And we will also see how the array elements can be accessed.
We'll also see how to find the size of the array, and we'll just learn different things associated
with the array.
When it comes to arrays.
It is very important to practice the syntax.
And so I encourage you to fire up your editor and type everything that will be shown in the demo.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Okay.
Here we are in the Basics Demo class and in the main method.
The previous invocation has been commented out and a new method called arrays has been introduced.
So here is where we are going to write our code and here is the template.
So just go ahead and type in this template code and it is invoked from the main method.
So there are three different ways to create an array and we will look at all three of them.
So let's start off with the first one.
We are going to create the same array that we have seen in the slides.
So it is an integer array which represents the scores of the student and different exams.
So it was an integer array.
So it will be of type eight and to tell that it is an array, we will have square brackets right after
the data type and the name is course and we will also have the new operator remember that an array is
an object and it is followed by the type again end and the size of the array, which is four.
So if you recall the definition that we have seen, we said that the array will be of fixed type, it
will have a fixed size that is the size of the array is specified at the creation time.
So this is what it is and it cannot be changed and it also will have elements of the same data type.
So it will it can only store values of any type.
And it's also an object.
And we can see the new operator here.
Now, let's put some print statements.
To print all of these values.
Four of them.
Right.
So the first one is midterm one.
And if you recall, we said that to access, you would see scores of the index number, an index numbering
starts from zero.
So the first element will be at zero at position.
So that's what it is.
Next we have midterm to.
Then this will be.
Let me fill these.
One.
This is the final and this is the project.
So at this instance we have already created the array and let's see what it prints.
So let's go into the basics directory, which is where we have this file.
Okay.
Trends zero because each of the elements will get a default of zero.
So they need to be initialized and they have not yet been initialized.
So by default, if you create an array, the elements will get the default value of the type of the
array, which is an end.
And we know that for it the default is zero.
So let's go ahead and initialize this array.
So it's just the same thing.
So we need to assign a value here.
Equal to let's have the same values.
The first one was 90, and we just copy this.
And the final one on the project is perfect.
100.
So let's recompile.
And we consider different values.
So this is how you would do it.
Now, here, instead of this, you can also initialize it.
This way you can have the square brackets in this way and you will not have any issues with that.
It's perfectly valid, but I would prefer to have them here because on this side also we have it right
after the type and I think it is much more clear, a much more readable if it is here.
So at least I prefer to have it.
And this way.
The next thing is, we said that it is all of the elements have to be of the same type.
So if you have a like a long here, then the compiler should obviously compile a complaint and as you
can see, it says.
Sorry.
So it gives us a familiar compilation error.
It says incompatible types, possible lossy conversion from long to end.
So it's got to be of the same type.
All of the elements have to be of the same type.
So we can see that this whole declaration statement is very similar to the way we declare an object
reference.
It's just that the difference is that over here in this case, it is a perimeter.
And with object references, like the ones that we have seen, we cannot have perimeter.
But syntax is very similar with the new keyword.
It's just that on this side we have this additional square brackets and here the parentheses is replaced
by the square brackets with the size of the array.
Now let's go ahead and create the second way of creating an array.
So let me comment that out.
So once again, it starts with ain't this scores equal to new?
And so it looks very similar.
But we'll have empty square brackets here.
And we will say the values, the elements will be specified right here and braces.
It's like the body of the array.
So we are initializing it in this way, 80 and 100.
So there are comma separated within the braces and you should not specify the size of the array.
If you do, you will get a compilation error.
So the size will be inferred implicitly.
So it is implicitly inferred and you do not have to specify it.
So we will see that we will get the same.
Output as earlier.
So that's the second way of doing it.
So let me show you what happens if we put the size of the array.
Let's see what the compilation error says.
So it says Array creation with both dimension, expression and initialization is illegal.
So this is the initialization part.
So we cannot have something like this.
So that is invalid and it's not permitted.
So that's the second one.
That.
And third one is the simplest one.
So this is simpler than this one, but this is even more simpler.
All you need to do is just remove this new and end here and that's it.
So you will just have the initialization part.
So we are going to strip this off.
And that's the third way.
So that's it.
Those are the three different ways of creating an aura.
So these two, I think you will use it if you have just few elements.
So you can just specify them here.
But if you have a lot of elements, like 20 or 30, then you would do it in this way.
And to initialize, perhaps you would use a control flow statement like a for loop.
So we will look at for loops later on.
But using that, you can easily initialize the elements.
So if you have long arrays, that's what you might do.
So we know that an array is an object, so which means that this is an object reference.
And we know that object references.
If not initialized, they will get a default off null.
Right.
So let's test that.
So here in scores, let me make it static.
We need to make it static in order to access from the static method.
That will be discussed later.
So this is what we have.
So it says that we have a null pointer exception because scores is null and we are trying to say null
of zero.
So we looked at the null pointer exception when we looked at the object references in the object references
lecture.
The object reference was initialized with null.
It was a default initialization.
And when we try to access an element like an ID value, it gave us the null pointer exception.
It's just the same thing here.
So we are trying to access an element of the array, but the array is not there and it is it is null.
So because of that we get the null pointer exception.
So array can be null, but we can re initialize it, we can initialize it here separately.
So let's do that.
So let me just remove this here.
Let's just comment on that line.
So this is fine.
So if you do that now, not this.
Sorry, we also need this one.
So this is good.
Now, if we have this, it will.
Okay.
So we get the, the output that we need.
So the array is initialized to null, but then the actual initialization, the object is created here
and then we are initializing the values.
So let me comment this M.O. this.
And let's also do the same thing that the second one here.
So let me just comment the type here, because the variable has already been declared.
So you can do this like with a block code.
So just use the block codes and this part is commented out on the rest of the line will be executed
as a statement.
Okay.
So this is also good.
Now, finally, let's also do the same thing for this one.
OC.
Now it gives an error.
So it says that we cannot do this and we are getting a compilation error.
That's because this sort of syntax can be used only in a declaration statement and you cannot use it
to re initialize an array.
Even this is like a re initialization because it is initialized to null.
So this is not possible with the syntax as possible only in a declaration statement.
Like this one.
So that's the initialization.
So initialization is possible only using the first two syntax.
So let me remove this and let me also comment this out.
Let's just have perhaps this one and let's say we want to know the size of the array, because very
often we would need the size of the array.
For instance, I mentioned about the for loop.
So there we want to know the size of the array in order to access all of the elements.
So to determine the size, what we will do is we will use a field in the array called length.
Let me just show it to you.
So we will just say so that would be, let's call it as number of exams.
And that would be.
Dot.
Lent.
So we would just say dot lent.
So it is like a field and it will give us the length of the or the size of the array.
So if at all you want to determine the size, this is what you will do.
And this is something that you will be doing very often.
So it prints the value for.
Okay.
So that's how you will determine the length or the size of the array.
Now, many students or few students have asked me in the past.
Can we do this?
So this is not possible.
This is a method and it is not a method that is associated with ideas, but length is a method in the
string class and it gives us the length of the string.
So that is the the number of characters that the string represents.
But with Aria, you cannot do that.
With Aria, you will only have the field, so you will just say dot length.
So do not get confused with the length method that is completely different.
So that's that.
Now we know that the aria can have only four elements and we can access access them in this way.
How about if we say minus one, which is a negative index and it is wrong, so if we compile it.
Compliance, fine.
But at runtime, when this particular statement got executed, the project where we are printing the
project, it says our index out of bounds exception.
So that's a runtime error and it says index minus one is out of bounds for the length four.
So essentially we cannot access it can only be from 0 to 3 because the size is four.
So you cannot have a negative number or if it is equal to greater than or equal to four, like four
or five or the size of the array, then it is going to give us the same error.
So the size of the area we know is four.
So if the index is four, which is the size of the array or greater than that, we will once again get
the same error.
Or if it is a negative number, we will get that runtime error, the same runtime error.
So as you can see it says our index out of bonds exception index for out of bounds for the length for.
So it cannot be minus one or it cannot be greater than or equal to the size of the array.
So it has to be this one has to be third.
And that is the fourth element.
So that's all there is to it is.
So what we have seen is an entry.
Now let's look at an area that can store object references.
So let's go ahead and do that also.
Now, we already created the student class, so let's create an array that will hold student objects,
object references corresponding to students.
So we created three students here and we have the student class in the same directory as in the basic
demo.
So we can actually access the student class from here also.
So let's do that.
So let's create a student array.
So it will be student followed by square brackets.
And the name, let's call it as too dense.
So always use a plural name when it comes to arrays because it is storing multiple values.
It's not like a variable which is storing a single value, a single value like a regular variable.
Since it's a data structure we would always like to use, we would we should name it as a plural score
or students or list or something like that.
And we will also discuss that when we get to the naming conventions chapter.
So now let's say a new student of, let's say three because we had three students.
So these are the three students and let's also print them.
This is how you would create.
So the first one is let's just call it as student one.
STUDENT two And.
STUDENT three So here we will have sorry, it will be.
Students This is the one, the variable name.
Students of zero, students of one and students of two.
Now, can you guess what will be printed here?
Let's see.
It prints null because each element here and the students represents an object reference and we know
that object reference by default it will get a value of null.
Earlier when we just declared this, we saw that each element in the array, which is also like a variable,
each element is like a variable and it got a default of zero because the type was end.
And here it's getting a default of null because the type is a student.
So object references get an null value.
So what we need to do is we just do what we have done here.
We need to initialize.
So we will say students of zero.
So we'll just say new student.
That's it.
So just like the way we create student objects here, we just do the same thing.
It's just that we are saying students of zero because that represents the first element.
So that's all we have.
And this will be student of one and student of two.
So three student objects have been created and it's print and see the values.
So I chose something.
Just don't worry about this notation.
When we print an object reference, when we have an object reference within the print statement, this
is how it would print.
And that will be clear later on.
Let's not worry about that.
So this is how you would create student objects.
Now I would like you to create the student objects using the second and third approach to.
So just pause the video and try to do that.
And I will also show you next how to do that.
And you can cross-check.
So let me just show you how we can do using the second and third approach.
So this is the second one, right?
This is the first one.
So in the second one, we will we need to strip this off the the size.
And we just need this.
I hope you have done the same thing.
And that's it.
Let's go ahead.
So it just prints.
The same values.
And third one as just remove this.
And that's it.
This is the simplest notation.
Right.
So that's all there is.
Now, if we want to initialize the state, so I'll just say student of zero.
So let's just initialize one variable.
We know that the student class has a lot of variables here, right?
So this is how you would initialize.
So you would once again use a dot operator.
So to initialize for the first student, you will say students of zero dot name.
Let's just initialize only the name.
And if you recall, the first student was John.
So that's all.
And let's also do the same thing here for second and third.
So this is one.
And this is too.
And thus the second student's name was Raj.
Third student's name was the good student Anita.
And here we well, let's access that.
So you will see students of zero dot name and it will print John.
This will print Raj.
And this will print on it.
So.
So all three names are being printed, so it's just no difference.
We just use the dot operator in this way.
So over here we had a separate object reference, but in this case the object reference is part of the
array and so we have to do it in this way.
So that's all there is.
Now, here also, let me just.
I just wanted to show something.
So if we had, we just initialize only the first and the second and if the third element was was not
initialized.
So in that case, if we print the names here, not the name, just the objects, it would print only
for the third one.
It will print null, right.
Because we initialized only zero and the first element and for the second one, it will remain as the.
You know, actually, I initialized it here, so it has to be new student of three.
That's it.
So now for zero ten, first we are we are initializing it with the student objects.
But for the second one, we still did not.
So it will still print now.
Kate Branstad, only the first on the second student were initialized.
So we are done with that.
So we have seen that an area can store both parameters as well as object references and it can be of
any other type.
And here I have two more examples here.
So this is great.
And here the type is car.
So it's a category and this is how it is initialized to the values.
So we have the single codes because four characters is how we initialize the values.
So these are collaterals.
So that's for care.
And this is great.
Think of it as student grades, a grades of a particular student and three different courses like A,
B and A.
Similarly, this one has is a double array, it's called as location, and it includes the latitude
and longitude coordinates.
So this is location of a place.
It's actually San Francisco.
You can think of an application like Google Maps.
They might be using an array such as this one to represent location.
This example I'm just showing you so that you can get a feel for the different use cases where an array
can be used.
So that's all there is.
And I hope you enjoyed learning about race, and I hope you have also implemented it with me.
If not, please to implement it because it's very important to practice and practice all of these three
different ways of creating an array.
Thank you.
And I'll see you in the next lecture.
Happy coding.